Many of you have probably heard of Feng Shui,
but how many of you know that this practice of creating
spacial harmony has a more ancient counterpart?
It's called Vastu, a 5,000 year old tradition that has
it's roots in the science of magnetism and geometry.
Everything from the direction your head faces
when you sleep, to clutter, is taken into consideration
when arranging your home or office according to Vastu.
(instrumental music)
Since you've last spoken with us
you have a new book out, The Way of Vastu.
Just an incredible book, so graceful and informative,
just like the last one.
And this one really focuses on prosperity,
which I think is on probably most people's minds
no matter what their portfolio looks like.
So talk about some of the principles behind,
and I know a little later on we're going to see what
it looks like in your office.
Talk about some of the principles about Vastu,
and space, and the movement of energy, and prosperity.
The premise of Vastu is that the environment is alive,
which is something that our Western mindset really
doesn't believe in, or pay attention to.
Most Western architects design more for aesthetics
than they do for how energy affects our physiology,
or our consciousness for that matter.
Vastu takes into consideration that the environment
is alive, and can support us.
The focus of the book is on prosperity because it's
an issue for most people.
When we design according to Vastu, the rectangular or
square shape is really the most life-enhancing shape.
So having that as your design really
supports your life in a beneficial way.
When an environment is not that way,
not shaped in that way, there can be problems.
Energy can move too fast.
One example that we use is the Parliament building
in Delhi.
It's shaped as a, I believe it's a circle, could be
not a circle though.
I'm trying to think.
It may be a octagon, but the fact is--
Like a bagua.
Yes.
The fact is that energy moves very quickly in
an environment like that.
It's really good for sporting events, because things
happen very quickly in a sporting event.
But when you have decisions
that affect an entire nation,
you want people to think clearly, and to take their time
to make wise decisions.
The problem with that building specifically, is that
because energy is moving so fast, you have a lot of chaos.
Well, let's get into a bit of a philosophical
chat about that.
Sure.
From some of what I've known and understanded,
say if you go to Rudolf Steiner's work and the work
of some others, that the notion of having more rounded,
and less linear, less right angles in a space, fosters
growth and creativity etcetera.
How does that pull into what you're saying?
Do we need to divide spaces so we have our
flowing creative spaces?
And then maybe in the office or certain spaces
have it more linear?
Can you talk about that a bit?
Well, from my perception, we're talking about
living spaces that are stable environments
where our energy can grow and support us,
as opposed to maybe
an educational environment where learning occurs
and there's an interchange, an intellectual interchange,
and maybe in those situations creativity seems to grow
quicker in those kind of environments.
But from a science point of view, this is what
Vastu is based on.
It is based on a structure being
the most life-enhancing,
and it's either square or rectangular.
I think Mike is probably the better person to talk to
about the real reasons this is so.
Mine is basically learned secondhand.
As an architect he can apply this
and really talk more in-depth about this.
But this is also your combined experience
and observation, and can you give us some ideas
along the lines of prosperity and space that maybe
was too quick flowing that you worked with,
with a client for example,
that has helped turn them around?
Everybody loves success stories.
Right.
Well, let me give you an example of one of our clients
who had a missing north area of their home.
They had a cut in the north.
What does that mean, a cut in the north?
The house, instead of having a full
side of the house there, it was cut in.
So it was like a very architecturally beautiful house,
but they had a lot of different planes, and areas
that moved, where energy got stuck or was eliminated.
When you don't have a north side of an environment,
that's your abundance.
And so they had this gorgeous house that they moved into,
that was a multi-million dollar home, but they were
having a lot of problems maintaining their financial
equilibrium once they moved into this house.
And so what we were able to do,
with the quality of Vastu that we offer
people in pre-existing structures,
is recreate a perfect Vastu for them so that
the energy could build in that area.
When the energy is missing in the north, it's the stable,
life-enhancing, magnetic energy that comes from the north,
if that isn't available, there's nothing to build on.
And so there's nothing that is attracting abundance for you.
And so we've developed technology based on the ancient
system of Vastu that allows us to
redesign environments, energetically,
that are already existing.
So people don't have to demolish an environment
or remodel a home.
And that includes energetically compensating
for missing spaces--
Missing areas, or areas let's say that are,
the opposite can happen.
If your southeast
is overextended,
let's say you have more property, or more house on
the southeast and it's growing, it's a larger
piece on that side.
It can create too much heat, and you can have
a lot of problems with things burning up.
So it's creating balance.
Vastu is about creating harmony in an environment,
and that balance, once that balance is created,
then it is as if you got a chiropractic adjustment
for your house.
Then the house goes, "Oh great, now I feel good."
And you can put your attention on building,
instead of trying to compensate.
So if like the body is in pain, what happens?
It's very difficult to concentrate on the things
that you do want.
You're compensating for what is uncomfortable,
and you're trying to adjust to feel less pain.
Whereas, if your body was without pain,
or without congestion, you then have a feeling
of balance and you can put your attention
on something else.
And most people, even if they have not been
conditioned to think about their homes as this
living and breathing entity, can certainly sense and feel
it when they go into a space.
Give us some common examples of how people
who wouldn't consider themselves to be particularly
sensitive, are in fact reacting to spaces around
them all the time.
What's classic in this?
Well, you can see it in the technology industry.
A lot of people work in cubicles, and they're sitting
in front of a computer for 10, 12, 14 hours a day
trying to get work done.
And a lot of that work, even though maybe most of us
don't think in the same way, that's very creative
work in a very linear way.
I mean, you're creating something
in technology.
And they're expected to work under pressure
at the same time.
They're working within a group, and they have an assignment
that needs to be done, so they're working under deadline.
And they burn out very easily,
and they have a lot of illness and--
And now that we're in Seattle, so of course
probably the technology capital now.
Yes, and you have people who are struggling
in their careers, under a lot of stress,
and they need to stay very focused,
very motivated, to be able to have
the success that they want.
And yet they're struggling
with that success because
they're working under adverse conditions.
They don't have natural lighting, they don't have windows,
maybe their computers are set up in the wrong way.
There's some things that can be done to enhance
their ability to think clearer, to be more creative,
to be more successful.
But if you don't know these things, you're working
against the stream of
creativity.
Under duress almost.
Energetic duress.
And you see a lot of that, you see a lot of people
burning out in that industry over time.
Conversely, we'll maybe walk into someone's house,
it may not be a beautiful home, maybe very, very, very
modest, simple home but it just feels good.
Right.
And people who have had their homes balanced
according to this science, either by us or they read
the book, and they learn about things that they can
do themselves, or they get an analysis
from us online.
We have clients all over the world, we don't actually
have to go to somebody's home to do that.
Once those...
Once those qualities are enhanced, that are enhanced
using Vastu, once there is balance in the environment,
it is like the environment takes a big sigh and you
actually start building the positive energy
in an environment.
And it's obvious, it is really obvious.
People can feel that.
And you don't have to understand subtle energy
to actually have an experience of that.
Right.
You just feel, you walk into certain restaurants
and you just feel that.
You go into another one,
You know there is a difference.
I won't come back here because
it doesn't feel good.
The restaurants that we've designed using Vastu,
or the healing centers,
or the homes that we've done
using Vastu, it's very significant, the change.
And it's always like food critics that will mention
when they go to a restaurant, they'll always mention
the environment.
We enjoyed being there, we didn't want to leave.
And it's not an obvious quality, but it's palpable,
it is something that people feel.
And certainly we mentioned this in the last
interview, Bill Gates was one of Michael's clients.
One of his clients, yes, but not a client
that necessarily understood what was going on,
but actually realized the effects
of the environment being aligned according to Vastu.
So, the good news in this is that most people
live in either square or rectangular spaces.
So it's not as if we're having to structurally
fight up hill on this one.
So for most individuals it's a matter of enhancing,
especially if you're going room by room.
Most rooms tend to be the rectangular or square, right?
We have some clients let's say, whose homes are
U-shaped, or L-shaped, and they have a swimming
pool in the middle, which is...
You see a lot of that in Southern California,
and those people,
the homes are architecturally gorgeous,
but they have this excessive water element,
and sometimes, most times in the wrong area.
And they're drowning in too much water
in the wrong area.
And people go, "Well we're not gonna fill in the swimming
"pool, what are we gonna do here?"
We recreate the Vastu boundaries in the environment
so that that swimming pool is eliminated from
the configurations, almost like it becomes
it's own property.
So there's subtle things that we can do that you don't
even see, that actually change the energy and environment.
So, I would say most homes
aren't perfectly Vastu oriented, very, very few are.
Even our home, even though we were looking
for very specific things, it's a remodel.
We used our home as our testing grounds,
because it isn't perfect, and we perfected,
over time, the technology that we now use
on people's homes all over the world.
So you can live in an imperfect Vastu environment
and thrive.
And also, part of what I was alluding to earlier,
are the micro-environments within the home.
In this case, we're going to be taking a look
at your workspace, or office.
And those often are more manageable in that the
integrity of the original structure is there, and that it's
usually square, or it's usually rectangular.
So there's not so much that you're having to
compensate for, I would assume.
Right, you know the most that people may need to do
is move the desk, and reorganize what is on the desk
for the proper workflow.
Let's talk about, before we go into your office
and get a visual scope of this, what are some of the most
frequent sort of mistakes that people make in setting
up their office space, that is blocking a flow
of abundance?
They're sitting facing the wrong direction.
You wanna sit facing north or east, and the reason
for this is that positive, magnetic energy coming from
the north, and the ultraviolet light coming from
the east are very enhancing to clarity of mind
and also to prosperity.
So when you want more success and prosperity
in your life, you wanna set up your desk so that
you can really be supported by that prosperity
that's already there.
A lot of people sit facing south or west,
and you're basically
not allowing that energy to support you.
It's hitting your back, it's not supporting and you're
not absorbing it in the way that can be used.
What about the whole culture of people,
often myself included, when I'm in a really creative mode
or I have a fair amount of writing to do, I'll often
get up and leave the house and go to a cafe.
Now this is pretty common, especially people who
work from home, needing this kind of shift in energy
or environment.
Does the same principle...
Would it be wise for us to apply the same principle,
say if we're going to our local coffee shop to do
our writing or our research?
Mm-hmm, just sit facing east or north.
I mean, it's as simple as that.
You're looking to absorb the positive energy
coming from those directions, and that's the most
powerful energy that you need to keep your mind
clear, and to be productive.
They've done all sorts of scientific studies on how
the thalamus in the brain fires, and it fires best
when you're sitting in one of those directions.
So it's recharging your battery.
So we can do that whether we're at home or not?
And if you're going into a workspace that's already
been created for you, have them switch your desk
around, the direction of your desk, take responsibility
for yourself?
Yes.
But if you can't do that, are there other ways
you can compensate if you don't...
If the structure isn't such,
or your cubicle or cubby isn't built in such
a way that you can flop your desk around the other
direction to face that north or the east, are there
ways in which you can still compensate for it?
I think that if you can't move your chair,
I mean maybe you can't move the desk but
at least try to move your chair.
You know, it's what we say to people.
The same thing when people say that they're sleeping
with their head to the north instead to the south,
and that's a whole 'nother important thing that
people should know about is the direction
that we sleep with our head.
Well why don't you talk about that for a moment
before we go into the office space.
It's best for you to sleep with your head on
the south wall, preferably.
And the reason is that our body is magnetic,
and the positive polarity is in our head.
The positive energy, magnetic energy, comes from the north.
What happens when you put two positive ends
of a magnet together?
They repel.
So if your head is to the north and you're sleeping
that way at night, you're not able to circulate your
energy in your body.
The body has iron in it, we're magnetic.
In India they bury people with their heads to the north.
Why?
Because it helps dehydrate them faster.
You know, it's not life-supporting, it's just the opposite.
And there's a lot of people who suffer from not good sleep,
and pain in the body, and illness, long-term illness,
over time, not being able to eliminate the stress
at night and recharge your batteries
will affect your health.
So is this iron-clad?
I mean with the vast array of uniqueness among
individuals, is this true for everybody,
or for most everyone?
Are there people who thrive having their head
to the north while they sleep?
There are some people that insist they're gonna
sleep that way no matter what.
But they're really the minority.
I've only met a few people like that, but then there are
those people that insist they need a lot of stress
in their life to feel alive.
But is that good for them, is it healthy?
You know, it's up to the individual,
but I think more and more people are realizing
the benefits of sleeping with their heads to the south.
It affects the relationship as well.
If you're not getting a good night's sleep, if you're not
comfortable in bed, you know, it affects your attitude
throughout the day.
It affects all kinds of areas of your life.
Okay, so if you don't already have your bed
with the head to the south,
then find a way to switch it, right?
Okay.
I would say, and if you can't, some people's bedrooms
are not set up that way, they have to have the head
of their bed on the north wall, try sleeping with your
head at the foot of the bed.
I mean some people notice that it works just as well.
Hey, it's certainly worth it to do a run,
at least as an experiment if we're not already
oriented that way.
And I can say that it definitely changed the energy,
and the quality of our sleep in doing that.
So now we're going to follow you over in a second,
and take a look at your office and some of the more
subtle influences you can do within a space
to bring about a proper flow of the energy.
Alright.
So I'd like to show you how I have set up
my desk for success.
I started with my northeast corner,
which is the water element.
It's where new ideas begin growing energy,
and we have the water element here
to help stimulate new ideas.
And then we go on to the southeast.
Southeast is the fire element, it's where ideas
take inspiration.
It's also a great place to put your phone or any
electrical items.
In the southeast is where the energy builds
and becomes very stable, and this is where information
gathers, and this is where I have my work that I'm
working on.
The pending work that I'm working on this week.
And over here in the northwest is the completed work.
Magazine articles, my books, my press kit, and this is where
the energy builds and goes out into the universe to
support our business.
So basically what's happening here is we have
a gigantic wheel of fortune going from where the little
fountain and spinning ball is, and moving around the
desk to where it begins coming into picking up
inspiration to where now it's really down in the trenches.
Earthy, grounded work with the earth element,
and then sweeping around to the place of completion
where your inspirations makes it's way out into the world.
Is that a good...
Is that the summary of it?
That's it in a nutshell.
That's easy enough, if you have a desk
you can do it.
Definitely.
Well that seemed clear enough looking at your
desk space, and it's a lovely desk space.
However, I've seen a lot of, especially women's desks,
that don't look anything like that.
In fact they're filled with little pictures
of their children and their grandchildren, dead flowers
from their anniversary, whatever.
Recipes, shopping lists.
What does it do when you end up having your desk
filled with clutter?
Well clutter holds energy and it can bring you...
Sorry.
Harry's looking for his toy, go ahead.
Okay, (laughs) clutter can hold energy
and it brings you down.
So it brings the energy down.
So where ever there's clutter, on a desk or
in an environment, it will hold energy
and create congestion.
So if you want your energy to flow freely
in your environment, on your desk, or in your home,
or your office, you need to clear the clutter.
So can it literally prohibit you from reaching
your goals, from receiving, from all of the above?
All of the above.
It really makes it difficult to think creatively
and to work optimally.
Can we expand that out just a little bit
before we sign off here, and talk about what the clutter
means in the rest of your home?
What about in your bedroom or your bathroom?
A lot of ladies aren't very tidy in their bedrooms,
and bathrooms.
Well, just imagine
where ever there's clutter, it's related to the direction
that it's in, it's that energy that it's oppressing.
So if you want abundance and you have clutter in the north,
it's all you really need to do is to do a little
spring cleaning, and eliminate that clutter,
and see what happens.
It's as if you are holding back the opportunities
when you have clutter.
And a lot of people collect things to feel more secure
in themselves, they don't realize how much it's holding
things in place.
Sometimes we want things to maintain a certain
equilibrium and be predictable, we like things as they are,
but then they become stagnant and outdated.
If you want energy to move, and you want new
opportunities to come in, clear the clutter.
Where's your love life again?
It's in the northwest.
In the northwest corner.
So if you have a bedroom, for example, in the northwest
corner and you have it full.
Full, full, full.
Trinkets, stuffed animals, you name it.
And you've got stagnant energy in your love life,
clear the clutter.
Thank you for that bit of wisdom.
I know there will be many men and women that
will be interested in following up on both
the prosperity and the love life.
Thanks so much for your time.
You're welcome.
Beautiful home.
Thank you.
If you resonate with Vastu, I recommend that you watch
the previous interview we did with Robin
and her husband, Michael.
They give a great amount of background information
on the ancient science itself.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(instrumental music)